---
title: Facilitation & Disruptive Behaviours
teaching: 30
exercises: 30
---

:::::: questions

- How can I handle and reduce disruptions during a meeting?
- How can I ensure that every meeting participant can contribute effectively?

::::::::::::::::


:::::: objectives

At the end of this episode, participants will be able to...

- Identify and mitigate disruptive behaviours.
- Facilitate inclusive discussions that enable everyone to participate.
- Prevent discussions from diverging away from the intended topic or going over time.

::::::::::::::::

## Introduction

The meeting host may have done all of the necessary steps to prepare for a good meeting, including putting together a meaningful agenda and preparing participants to serve in the various meeting roles.
However, once the meeting starts, and you've brought your participants together into your virtual space, a number of personality traits and behaviours may combine to make the meeting uninspiring, demotivating, and downright painful.
These behaviours can be particularly challenging when participants span multiple levels of your organisation's hierarchy, or have different levels of power due to systemic social marginalisation. 

Although you may not be able to flatten the organisational hierarchy or correct long-standing imbalances in power distribution in society, there are steps you can take during a meeting to mitigate negative disruptive behaviours. 
Some of these strategies are most easily implemented when you are serving as the meeting Facilitator, but others can be enacted by any meeting participant.
Using these strategies intentionally across your meetings can help shift organisational culture over time and build a more positive meeting environment in which all participants feel comfortable sharing their perspectives.

## Common Disruptive Behaviors

The goal of the Facilitator is to complete the agenda within the assigned timeframe, giving each participant a chance to contribute to the decisions being made.

It's easy for certain behaviours to work against this, by slowing down the meeting or suppressing voices. Therefore, it's important that the Facilitator can identify these disruptors, and take actions to prevent them negatively affecting the meeting.

::::::::::::::::::: challenge

## Identifying Disruptive Behaviours (5 minutes)

Think of a disruptive meeting behavior that you have observed.
Describe what happened, how it impacted the meeting, and what could have been done to avoid or correct the disruption. 

This exercise should take about 5 minutes.

:::::: solution

The list generated by participants will differ for each session, but some common themes that might emerge include: 

- One or a few people talking repeatedly while others don't talk at all
- Interrupting
- Re-stating someone else's idea and claiming it as their own
- Someone talking for a long time
- Playing "devil's advocate"
- Shutting down other people's ideas, being dismissive or overly negative
- Participants stuck debating unimportant details ("bike shedding")
- <!--- others to include in this list? --->

:::::::::::::::

The United States National Ocean and Atmospheric Association provides one [possible taxonomy of disruptive behaviours](https://coast.noaa.gov/ddb/), along with possible interventions for each.
In this course, we will focus on some of the most common behaviours, and those most likely to prevent the meeting from being successful, but we encourage you to check out this reference for further learning. 




::::::::::::::::::::::::::

<!-- Based on https://coast.noaa.gov/ddb/ 
 some attributes have been merged, to focus on their common behaviours?-->


### Overly Negative

<!-- Complaining, Indecisive, Argumentative -->
Overly negative participants may frequently complain or argue, in pursuit of perfection or simply personal attention. This has the effect of reducing the optimism of other participants, and slowing down progress.

### Overly Positive

<!-- Eager -->
Overly positive participants may be too agreeable, leading to overcommitments without critical assessment of viability. This can lead to under delivery or increased team stress when deliverables are due.

### Dominating Conversation

<!-- Talkative, Dominating, Arrogant -->
Some participants love to speak, they may have strong ideas or simply believe their experience/tenure gives them a larger platform. This may lead to rambling, and reduce the ability for all participants to feel comfortable contributing their own ideas.

### Diverting Conversation
<!-- Diverting -->

Some participants frequently attempt to divert the conversation, this may be an attempt to stay light-hearted during stressful meeting or simply disinterest in the topic. This may lead to the meeting running over time, or agenda items not being completed.

<!-- Not covered: Shy, Apathetic -->

## Handling disruptive behaviour

Dealing with disruptions can be slightly scary, but the other meeting participants rely on you, as the chair, to bring the meeting back on track. Most of the times this can be done in a gentle, non-confrontational manner. This can be done as a two-step intervention:

- First, interrupt, if necessary, and state your observation of what is happening. E.g. "We are getting a bit of track here and are no longer talking about our objective."
- Second, suggest a constructive way forward. E.g. "Let us refocus, the question we were discussing was... Who can suggest a solution here?"

However, if this is not successful, it might be necessary to be firmer in calling out the disruption. Address the disrupting person by name, and tell them what to do or stop doing. For example, "Tina, please refrain from using dismissive language when talking about your colleagues work."

See also
- [Life Labs Learning: Meeting Course Correction](https://www.lifelabslearning.com/book/download/meeting-course-corrections)
- [NOAA: Dealing with disruptive behaviours](https://coast.noaa.gov/ddb/)


:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: discussion

### Forming the Fellowship of the Ring

#### Setting

> You've just gotten back from a project kick-off meeting yesterday. It ran too long, the agenda seemed aimless and no-one stuck to it, and Gimli rambled for far too long on tangential topics. 
>
> You're part of the RSE sub-team in the project, and you're determined that _your_ meetings will NOT be death-by-powerpoint and that Gimli will talk about as long as everyone else in the team, no longer.
>
> Now you're _in_ the team meeting. Gimli is talking about the project tracker you should be using, and he's spent fifteen minutes explaining how good the Mithril Project manager (tm) is. Legolas would like to use the Lembas project tacking method, and you can't quite seem to get a word in edgewise. 

#### Exercise

- Discuss in small groups (or write down, if you're working solo): 
  - What types of disruptions are these? See the NOAA resource for more different _types_ of disruptors and how to deal with them. 
  - What might be a good way to handle this? 
  - Assign the roles of Gimli and Legolas to two team members. Have a chair role-play how to redirect and defuse this type of difficult behaviour. 

:::::::::::::: solution

### What did we learn?

Thinking about the exercise: What went well? What was hard? Interrupting when a meeting isn't "going right" isn't easy, but it doesn't have to be hard. Some points to remember: 

- Address disruptions in two ways.
  - At the time the disruption happens, make sure the behaviour is stopped.
  - _After_ the meeting, make sure that you look at systemic ways to reduce that type of disruption as well - e.g. if you always run over time, consider assigning a standard "timekeeper" role to every meeting.
- Practice can make it easier to interrupt, but **be aware of power dynamics**: it's one thing to stop a disagreement when you're chairing a meeting, but it might (or might not) be wise to interrupt someone who is in a much "higher" position in a hierarchy, if they aren't receptive to feedback.
- If you _do_ have power or privilege (e.g. you're a chair, or you're a member of an in-group), make sure to use that power and privelege to support marginalised members. Sometimes it could be as simple as repeating what another person said and attributing it to the original speaker.

::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::: keypoints

* Set explicit expectations and be ready to intervene gently then forcefully if disruptive behaviours recur.
* Invite and make space for contributions from meeting participants.
* Reinforce and attribute the contributions of marginalised individuals.

::::::::::::::::


